# Analysis of Neural Activity Changes Associated with LRRK2 Gene Mutation: A Computational Approach using In-Vitro Networks
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder whose etiology is strongly linked to the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 gene - or Dardarin. Al- though this causal relationship is well established, the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. In this thesis, we use Microelectrode Array (MEA) technology to analyze in-vitro neural networks, in order to delineate the characteristic neural activity patterns of carriers of the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 gene, associated with PD pathogenesis.
This study utilizes recordings from both G2019S-mutated cortical neural networks and from healthy control networks in two phases: before (baseline) and after Kainic Acid stimulation. The chemical stimulation process aims to induce neurotoxic effects, and by incorporating post-stimulation data into the analysis, to record changes in neural activity.
The work focuses on the development of a three-phase algorithm capable of re- ceiving raw MEA recordings and recognizing the population to which they belong, distinguishing between healthy and mutated activity. Initially, Spike Sorting tech- niques are used to identify individual neuronal activities. Subsequently, a Point Process Modeling technique is employed to characterize the parameters of the ISI curve distribution, through Maximum A Posteriori Estimation. Finally, a classifica- tion phase is performed, where the model is trained with the parameters obtained from the modeling, and the data are categorized initially into mutated and con- trol neurons, and subsequently, in a multi-class problem, both in terms of type of population and baseline vs. post-stimulation activity.
The results obtained from binary classification demonstrate an excellent accuracy of 99% (mutated vs. control) using a Support Vector Machine model.
Furthermore, in a more nuanced four-class classification scenario (mutated vs. control and pre- vs. post-stimulation), a Random Forest classifier achieves an accu- racy of 77%, showcasing its efficacy in identifying both the genetic mutation and the stimulation-induced changes in neural activity.
The research sheds light on the complex interplay between the LRRK2 mutation and neuronal activity dynamics, providing valuable insights into the pathophysio- logical mechanisms underlying Parkinson’s disease, as confirmed by the obtained results. Moreover, the computational framework developed in this study offers a novel approach for studying neurodegenerative disorders at the cellular level, with implications for future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
